Too large, too

Heavy, wings too fine, your pectoral muscles

Too weak to fly: How does it feel to be the very last, in-

Toxicated with fermented fruits.. wanting sex, seeking

But finding no one, blue on Mauritius and everyone else gone away?

Transported on long voyages, living cans of Spam, your eggs devoured by

Human beings and other swine, rats

Apes.. waiting to be consumed – towering three feet into

Loneliness, a 44-pound weight

Almost nothing known about

It.. though it spent its winter months

By New York City, on the North Atlantic coast.

Tender lateral flaps protruded from a flattened bill

Likely for feeling prey beneath the waves: shellfish

Crustaceans, mollusks..  lamellae in its lower jaw to sieve the sand

When burrowing. Drowned on hooks fishermen hauled in with their catch.

On the markets of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Baltimore, Philadelphia

Its flesh disesteemed, festering unpurchased for its fishy taste.

Nesting grounds never located

No one knows why they died out, though they probably

Like other ducks, slept with one open eye –

The last Labrador duck surprised December 12, 1878

Elmira, Southern Tier, New York, a hunter’s rifle blast.

From autumn 1875, Long Island: the last corpse to be preserved

Wears a plastic bag upon its head

Sheds feathers now

When touched

Tasmania was its and its alone.. raised

Sheltered in its mothers’ pouch, eschewing no

Fight, it mostly played victor. Hunting in long forays for

Wombats, wallabies, possums, potoroos, trout. Then

Arriving settlers from Europe. Clear-cut woods for pastureland

Drove it away, its prey grown scarce. Could open its jaws to

90° – but its bite was too weak to kill a sheep

The sheep industry accused it of this crime. Eradicated for bounty

Van Diemen’s Land Company, colonizing its island, hid its own

Mismanagement from stockholders in London, bounty

Rising with the bodies settlers turned in – soon the government determined budgets

Maintained annihilation pressure on thylacines, posting annual savings

As sightings became rare. Also called Tasmanian Tiger

Exaggerating danger. Alleged vampirism on ovine throats, locking

Jaws in scholarly literature. Its threats resembled yawns.

The final thylacine died the night of September 7, 1936 in a

Cage at Hobart Zoo, locked from sleeping quarters in winter cold.

The government had declared it a protected species 59 days before. Birth of

Offspring in captivity: a one-time success

Sitting at the windowsill, glued

To the windowpane, your cat-eyes to the pigeon on the building’s



Eaves. If only you knew how many passenger pigeons

Once filled the skies! Their flocks darkened the sun for days at a



Time, from horizon to horizon, one flow of feathers

Fluttering hearts, bodies pulsing together, closer and closer in seamless



Strata – billions of birds, always followed by the next

Platoon. Dung fell like melting snowflakes. They say the noise of wingbeats



Was like a lullaby.. entire forests

Served as breeding grounds, branches broke together beneath the weight



Of countless bodies. From the Rocky Mountains to the Hudson Bay, down to

The Gulf of Mexico, these nomads filled East North America in search of



Nuts, berries, fruit. When divebombed by a falcon they dissolved

In angles, curves, and undulations – evolutions reproduced in their perfection



By every new flock in the same place of the attack

The heavens inscribed anew. Although your lips are trembling,



You, tiny flustered cat, can no longer see their flight maneuvers with your own

Eyes: Shot down in huddled masses, slain, devoured, their forests cleared away



No pigeons left. With a single gunshot on April 3, 1902, they left the world.

The last hanger-on, Martha, died September 1, 1914, at 1 pm in the Cincinnati



Zoo

For her

First flight outside her cage

Martha ascended 52 years after her death

On a passenger flight, packed in a crate, from Washington D.C.

The Smithsonian Institution lent her preserved body

For an anniversary exhibition to the San Diego Zoo.

The journey, according to their deal

Was to be completed in the security of a stewardess’ lap. So many years

After the extermination of all passenger pigeons a sudden

Fear of loss

Dragging along the bottom on its

Stumps, grazing kelp, stolid colossus

Thirty feet in length, weighing in more than ten tons, tree-bark skin, 40 pounds of heart.

Toothless, only mammal without finger bones, incapable of self-defense

When Vitus Bering’s ship wrecked on its solitary shore

Seeking a land bridge between Asia and America

In the name of Czar Peter the Great, hungry seamen savaged

Sea cows alive. Bering died of scurvy, the naturalist accompanying him

Georg Wilhelm Steller announced their existence on his return to

Mainland Russia. Buffet opened – 27 years after discovery, seal

Hunters clubbed to death its last of kin. Victuals and oil.

Some, Steller describes, hewed great pieces from the

Still living beast. The female’s vulva is located eight inches above the anus

One can easily fit five fingers in the vaginal opening

Without constraint

How does it feel: To be a restless nomad

Stranded on a Mediterranean isle? Big-footed

Your ancestors ventured out by lowered seas

Of the Ice Age to unknown lands, leaving footprints

Where no elephant had gone before. When the ice came to its end

The water rose and they stood trapped

And after them stood you. Faced with depleting resources, there wasn’t much to do but

Shrink.. from foot to shoulder you were

Less than three feet tall. How did it feel

To lose your legroom, to hunger



                                                Stolen glances out to

Sea –





On Sicily, at least, your skull

Would have evoked cyclopes

Forever

Lying on your back

Sky skirt

Ruffled, a fuzz-width too unkempt to be

Smoothed down with a moment’s loving care..

Beak still

Your head turned to one

Side, white belly-feather tenderness.

As von Kittlitz arrived on Chichijima, May 2, 1828, he dis-

Covered, clobbered you down at disembarkment – you were so many!

Ground for you vast as the sky!

Two years later, whalers began landing for ship repairs

Rats, settlers on

Land, goats, pigs, dogs, cats. Your toes spread a-

Part, brittle

Twigs

Your species never

Found again

Once fluttering over

Dunes around the edge of San Francisco

Your seams sighed on by salty whispers of unendingness and sea..

Rain threatened you with drowning, wind with rattling away

You lived only a few weeks from Mid-March until

Mid-April, seeking from first-flight the violet smudges of eyeliner on the tanned wings of your females

With iridescent blue and eyelash-fluttering

Of impassioned points of white outside your wings.

Laying their eggs on cat’s clover and lupines. Where ants warded off

Wasps and parasites from your caterpillars in exchange for sustenance of

Honeydew from glands on their backs – until Argentinian ants

Supplanted the Californian, urban development overbuilt your dunes with

Luxury homes, the Sunset District, today one of the most densely-populated of

The City. A few hangers-on at the military base on the Presidio, eliminated

By the building of a landing strip. There with the four-year-old Golden Gate Bridge as backdrop

The last Xerces Blue flew in the chilly springtime air of March 23, 1941

Into an entomology professor’s

Net


The pinned and mounted secret of your metamorphosis

Discovered in

Just a few square miles

Of cloudy elfin forest in Costa Rica

Between crawling boughs, stirring roots, dripping leaves

In 1964: unfathomably luminousneonorangegold, posing sublime in

Unbridled stillness before sex.. lived underground

Above only in

April for a few days of orgy to greet the rain.

Males rose

First, awaited females, bodies taut.

Any movement an advance – the first twitching limb provoked hops and cries

Throughout the mass; whoever managed to mount another’s back clung on

For hours, regardless of rivals’ violence. Coincidental lovers

Left seafoams of fertilized eggs in puddles under roots.

Last sighting: May 15, 1989 when

For the second year in a row only one single, golden male emerged.

Nullified by

Human-spread fungal infection, chytridiomycosis, on a

Warming globe

leaving is not enough; you must
stay gone. train your heart
like a dog. change the locks
even on the house he’s never
visited. you lucky, lucky girl.
you have an apartment
just your size. a bathtub
full of tea. a heart the size
of Arizona, but not nearly
so arid. don’t wish away
your cracked past, your
crooked toes, your problems
are papier mache puppets
you made or bought because the vendor
at the market was so compelling you just
had to have them. you had to have him.
and you did. and now you pull down
the bridge between your houses.
you make him call before
he visits. you take a lover
for granted, you take
a lover who looks at you
like maybe you are magic. make
the first bottle you consume
in this place a relic. place it
on whatever altar you fashion
with a knife and five cranberries.
don’t lose too much weight.
stupid girls are always trying
to disappear as revenge. and you
are not stupid. you loved a man
with more hands than a parade
of beggars, and here you stand. heart
like a four-poster bed. heart like a canvas.
heart leaking something so strong
they can smell it in the street.

oh antic God
return to me
my mother in her thirties
leaned across the front porch
the huge pillow of her breasts
pressing against the rail
summoning me in for bed.

I am almost the dead woman’s age times two.

I can barely recall her song
the scent of her hands
though her wild hair scratches my dreams
at night.   return to me, oh Lord of then
and now, my mother’s calling,
her young voice humming my name.

Was it like lifting a veil
And was the grass treacherous, the green grass

Did you think of your own mother

Was it like a virus
Did the software flicker

And was this the beginning
Was it like that

Was there gas station food

and was it a long trip


And is there sun there
or drones
or punishment
or growth


Was it a blackout

And did you still create me
And what was I like on the first day of my life


Were we two from the start
And was our time an entrance
or an ending


Did we stand in the heated room
Did we look at the painting

Did the snow appear cold
Were our feet red with it, with the wet snow

And then what were our names
Did you love me or did I misunderstand

Is it terrible


Do you intend to come back

Do you hear the world’s keening

Will you stay the night
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
Ae fareweel, and then forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears   I'll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
Who shall say that Fortune grieves him,
While the star of hope she leaves him?
Me, nae cheerfu' twinkle lights me;
Dark despair around benights me.

I'll ne'er blame my partial fancy,
Naething could resist my Nancy;
But to see her was to love her;
Love but her, and love forever.
Had we never lov'd sae kindly,
Had we never lov'd sae blindly,
Never met—or never parted—
We had ne'er been broken-hearted.

Fare thee weel, thou first and fairest!
Fare thee weel, thou best and dearest!
Thine be ilka joy and treasure,
Peace. enjoyment, love, and pleasure!
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
Ae fareweel, alas, forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears   I'll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee!

And thou art dead, as young and fair
As aught of mortal birth;
And form so soft, and charms so rare,
Too soon return'd to Earth!
Though Earth receiv'd them in her bed,
And o'er the spot the crowd may tread
In carelessness or mirth,
There is an eye which could not brook
A moment on that grave to look.

I will not ask where thou liest low,
Nor gaze upon the spot;
There flowers or weeds at will may grow,
So I behold them not:
It is enough for me to prove
That what I lov'd, and long must love,
Like common earth can rot;
To me there needs no stone to tell,
'T is Nothing that I lov'd so well.

Yet did I love thee to the last
As fervently as thou,
Who didst not change through all the past,
And canst not alter now.
The love where Death has set his seal,
Nor age can chill, nor rival steal,
Nor falsehood disavow:
And, what were worse, thou canst not see
Or wrong, or change, or fault in me.

The better days of life were ours;
The worst can be but mine:
The sun that cheers, the storm that lowers,
Shall never more be thine.
The silence of that dreamless sleep
I envy now too much to weep;
Nor need I to repine
That all those charms have pass'd away,
I might have watch'd through long decay.

The flower in ripen'd bloom unmatch'd
Must fall the earliest prey;
Though by no hand untimely snatch'd,
The leaves must drop away:
And yet it were a greater grief
To watch it withering, leaf by leaf,
Than see it pluck'd to-day;
Since earthly eye but ill can bear
To trace the change to foul from fair.

I know not if I could have borne
To see thy beauties fade;
The night that follow'd such a morn
Had worn a deeper shade:
Thy day without a cloud hath pass'd,
And thou wert lovely to the last,
Extinguish'd, not decay'd;
As stars that shoot along the sky
Shine brightest as they fall from high.

As once I wept, if I could weep,
My tears might well be shed,
To think I was not near to keep
One vigil o'er thy bed;
To gaze, how fondly! on thy face,
To fold thee in a faint embrace,
Uphold thy drooping head;
And show that love, however vain,
Nor thou nor I can feel again.

Yet how much less it were to gain,
Though thou hast left me free,
The loveliest things that still remain,
Than thus remember thee!
The all of thine that cannot die
Through dark and dread Eternity
Returns again to me,
And more thy buried love endears
Than aught except its living years.

I know what my heart is like
      Since your love died:
It is like a hollow ledge
Holding a little pool
      Left there by the tide,
      A little tepid pool,
Drying inward from the edge.
Wouldst thou hear what man can say
In a little? Reader, stay.
Underneath this stone doth lie
As much beauty as could die;
Which in life did harbour give
To more virtue than doth live.
If at all she had a fault,
Leave it buried in this vault.
One name was Elizabeth,
Th' other let it sleep with death:
Fitter, where it died to tell,
Than that it liv'd at all. Farewell.
The world’s a world of trouble, your mother must
                      have told you
               that. Poison leaks into the basements

and tedium into the schools. The oak
                      is going the way
               of the elm in the upper Midwest—my cousin

earns a living by taking the dead ones
                      down.
               And Jason’s alive yet, the fair-

haired child, his metal crib next
                      to my daughter’s.
             Jason is one but last saw light five months ago

and won’t see light again.

                                                  ·

Leaf against leaf without malice
                     or forethought,
            the manifold species of murmuring

harm. No harm intended, there never is.
                     The new
            inadequate software gets the reference librarian

fired. The maintenance crew turns off power one
                     weekend
            and Monday the lab is a morgue: fifty-four

rabbits and seventeen months of research.
                     Ignorance loves
          as ignorance does and always

holds high office.

                                                  ·

Jason had the misfortune to suffer misfortune
                   the third
          of July. July’s the month of hospital ro-

tations; on holiday weekends the venerable
                   stay home.
          So when Jason lay blue and inert on the table

and couldn’t be made to breathe for three-and-a-
                  quarter hours,
         the staff were too green to let him go.

The household gods have abandoned us to the gods
                  of juris-
         prudence and suburban sprawl. The curve

of new tarmac, the municipal pool,
                  the sky at work
         on the pock-marked river, fatuous sky,

the park where idling cars, mere yards
                  from the slide
         and the swingset, deal beautiful oblivion in nickel

bags: the admitting room and its stately drive,
                  possessed
         of the town’s best view.

                                                 ·

And what’s to become of the three-year-old brother?
                  When Jason was found
         face down near the dogdish—it takes

just a cupful of water to drown—
                   his brother stood still
         in the corner and said he was hungry

and said that it wasn’t his fault.
                  No fault.
         The fault’s in nature, who will

without system or explanation
                make permanent
         havoc of little mistakes. A natural

mistake, the transient ill-will we define
                as the normal
         and trust to be inconsequent,

by nature’s own abundance soon absorbed.

                                                  ·

Oak wilt, it’s called, the new disease.
                Like any such
         contagion—hypocrisy in the conference room,

flattery in the halls—it works its mischief mostly
                unremarked.
         The men on the links haven’t noticed

yet. Their form is good. They’re par.
                The woman who’s
         prospered from hating ideas loves causes

instead. A little shade, a little firewood.
                I know
         a stand of oak on which my father’s

earthly joy depends. We’re slow
                to cut our losses.
                Dull to myself, and almost dead to these
                My many fresh and fragrant mistresses;
                Lost to all music now, since everything
                Puts on the semblance here of sorrowing.
                Sick is the land to th' heart, and doth endure
                More dangerous faintings by her desp'rate cure.
                But if that golden age would come again
                And Charles here rule, as he before did reign;
                If smooth and unperplex'd the seasons were
                As when the sweet Maria lived here;
                I should delight to have my curls half drown'd
                In Tyrian dews, and head with roses crown'd.
                And once more yet (ere I am laid out dead)
                Knock at a star with my exalted head.
                He could not die when trees were green,
                         For he loved the time too well.
                His little hands, when flowers were seen,
                         Were held for the bluebell,
                         As he was carried o'er the green.

                His eye glanced at the white-nosed bee;
                         He knew those children of the spring:
                When he was well and on the lea
                         He held one in his hands to sing,
                         Which filled his heart with glee.

                Infants, the children of the spring!
                         How can an infant die
                When butterflies are on the wing,
                         Green grass, and such a sky?
                         How can they die at spring?

                He held his hands for daisies white,
                         And then for violets blue,
                And took them all to bed at night
                         That in the green fields grew,
                         As childhood's sweet delight.

                And then he shut his little eyes,
                         And flowers would notice not;
                Birds' nests and eggs caused no surprise,
                         He now no blossoms got;
                         They met with plaintive sighs.

                When winter came and blasts did sigh,
                         And bare were plain and tree,
                As he for ease in bed did lie
                         His soul seemed with the free,
                         He died so quietly.

                         There is a hornet in the room
                         and one of us will have to go
                         out the window into the late
                         August midafternoon sun. I
                         won. There is a certain challenge
                         in being humane to hornets
                         but not much. A launch draws
                         two lines of wake behind it
                         on the bay like a delta
                         with a melted base. Sandy
                         billows, or so they look,
                         of feathery ripe heads of grass,
                         an acid-yellow kind of
                         goldenrod glowing or glowering
                         in shade. Rocks with rags
                         of shadow, washed dust clouts
                         that will never bleach.
                         It is not like this at all.
                         The rapid running of the
                         lapping water a hollow knock
                         of someone shipping oars:
                         it’s eleven years since
                         Frank sat at this desk and
                         saw and heard it all
                         the incessant water the
                         immutable crickets only
                         not the same: new needles
                         on the spruce, new seaweed
                         on the low-tide rocks
                         other grass and other water
                         even the great gold lichen
                         on a granite boulder
                         even the boulder quite
                         literally is not the same

                               II
                         A day subtle and suppressed
                         in mounds of juniper enfolding
                         scratchy pockets of shadow
                         while bigness—rocks, trees, a stump—
                         stands shadowless in an overcast
                         of ripe grass. There is nothing
                         but shade, like the boggy depths
                         of a stand of spruce, its resonance
                         just the thin scream
                         of mosquitoes ascending.
                         Boats are light lumps on the bay
                         stretching past erased islands
                         to ocean and the terrible tumble
                         and London (“rain persisting”)
                         and Paris (“changing to rain”).
                         Delicate day, setting the bright
                         of a young spruce against the cold
                         of an old one hung with unripe cones
                         each exuding at its tip
                         gum, pungent, clear as a tear,
                         a day tarnished and fractured
                         as the quartz in the rocks
                         of a dulled and distant point,
                         a day like a gull passing
                         with a slow flapping of wings
                         in a kind of lope, without
                         breeze enough to shake loose
                         the last of the fireweed flowers,
                         a faintly clammy day, like wet silk
                         stained by one dead branch
                         the harsh russet of dried blood.
                         Those twenty-six letters filling the blackboard
                         Compose the dark, compose
                         The illiterate summer sky & its stars as they appear

                         One by one, above the schoolyard.

                         If the soul had a written history, nothing would have happened:
                         A bird would still be riding the back of a horse,

                         And the horse would go on grazing in a field, & the gleaners,

                         At one with the land, the wind, the sun examining
                         Their faces, would go on working,

                         Each moment forgotten in the swipe of a scythe.

                         But the walls of the labyrinth have already acquired
                         Their rose tint from the blood of slaves
                         Crushed into the stone used to build them, & the windows

                         Of stained glass are held in place by the shriek

                         And sighing body of a falling chimneysweep through
                         The baked & blackened air. This ash was once a village,

                         That snowflake, time itself.

                         But until the day it is permitted to curl up in a doorway,
                         And try to sleep, the snow falling just beyond it,

                         There’s nothing for it to do:

                         The soul rests its head in its hands & stares out
                         From its desk at the trash-littered schoolyard,

                         It stays where it was left.
                         When the window fills with pain, the soul bears witness,
                         But it doesn’t write. Nor does it write home

                         Having no need to, having no home.
                         In this way, & in no other

                         Was the soul gradually replaced by the tens of thousands
                         Of things meant to represent it—

                         All of which proclaimed, or else lamented, its absence.

                         Until, in the drone of auditoriums & lecture halls, it became
                         No more than the scraping of a branch
                         Against the side of a house, no more than the wincing

                         Of a patient on a couch, or the pinched, nasal tenor
                         Of the strung-out addict’s voice,

                         While this sound of scratching, this tapping all night,
                         Enlarging the quiet instead of making a music within it,

                         Is just a way of joining one thing to another,

                         Myself to whoever it is—sitting there in the schoolroom,

                         Sitting there while also being led through the schoolyard
                         Where prisoners are exercising in the cold light—

                         A way of joining or trying to join one thing to another,
                         So that the stillness of the clouds & the sky

                         Opening beneath the blindfold of the prisoner, & the cop
                         Who leads him toward it, toward the blank

                         Sail of the sky at the end of the world, are bewildered

                         So that everything, in this moment, bewilders

                         Them: the odd gentleness each feels in the hand
                         Of the other, & how they don’t stop walking, not now

                         Not for anything.
                         A fool I was to sleep at noon,
                         And wake when night is chilly
                         Beneath the comfortless cold moon;
                         A fool to pluck my rose too soon,
                         A fool to snap my lily.

                         My garden-plot I have not kept;
                         Faded and all-forsaken,
                         I weep as I have never wept:
                         Oh it was summer when I slept,
                         It's winter now I waken.

                         Talk what you please of future spring
                         And sun-warm'd sweet to-morrow:—
                         Stripp'd bare of hope and everything,
                         No more to laugh, no more to sing,
                         I sit alone with sorrow.
                         This is the debt I pay
                         Just for one riotous day,
                         Years of regret and grief,
                         Sorrow without relief.

                         Pay it I will to the end —
                         Until the grave, my friend,
                         Gives me a true release —
                         Gives me the clasp of peace.

                         Slight was the thing I bought,
                         Small was the debt I thought,
                         Poor was the loan at best —
                         God! but the interest!
                         Come, come thou bleak December wind,
                         And blow the dry leaves from the tree!
                         Flash, like a Love-thought, thro' me, Death
                         And take a Life that wearies me.
